Tutorial (#139)
canonical/mongodb-operator: documentation/tutorial.md

# Charmed MongoDB tutorial

> The Charmed MongoDB Operator delivers automated operations management from day 0 to day 2 on the [MongoDB Community Edition](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo) document database. It is an open source, end-to-end, production-ready data platform on top of juju. As a first step this tutorial show you how to get Charmed MongoDB up and running, but the tutorial does not stop there. Through this tutorial you will learn a variety of operations, everything from adding replicas to advanced operations such as enabling TLS. Specifically this tutorial will cover:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Charmed MongoDB Operator delivers automated operations management from day 0 to day 2 on the [MongoDB Community Edition](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo) document database. It is an open source, end-to-end, production-ready data platform on top of Juju. As a first step this tutorial shows you how to get Charmed MongoDB up and running, but the tutorial does not stop there. Through this tutorial you will learn a variety of operations, everything from adding replicas to advanced operations such as enabling TLS. Specifically this tutorial will cover:
```

Reviewer: I do have a few questions about this paragraph. It's likely your users will have a higher baseline of knowledge than I do about the product, but I wasn't sure what the following meant:
- day 0 to day 2
- TLS (in a tutorial I'd always expand the first use of every acronym, in case there are others it could be confused for)
- adding replicas

- I'd also add a link to the Juju page where you mention Juju
- Is there a website for the MongoDB Community Edition? I got a bit confused to be taken to GitHub

Author: All of these are great suggestions! I've updated each of these accordingly Except for:
- "adding replicas", this is a fundamental concept of MongoDB that we will expect the user to know
- and the URL for MongoDB Community Edition, the offical site for MongoDB Community Edition is https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community and I think the download page is not as informative as the github page.

Author: Do you think we should mention that we expect a familiarity with MongoDB?

Reviewer: Personally, I'm always in favour of stating expectations up front. In the case of a tutorial that expects the reader to know something before they start, telling them what topics they need to be familiar with is helpful as it sets their expectations about whether or not they can currently complete the tutorial. If they can't yet, I'd say "be opinionated" and point them in the direction of the best resources to help them get to the right level. In my experience, if the reader has to go away and find out these things on their own after struggling with a tutorial they don't understand well (i.e. if the entry barrier is too high) they often don't come back - so I'm a proponent of making it easy for them :)

- Setting up your environment using LXD and Juju.
- Deploying MongoDB using a single command.
- Accessing the admin database directly.
- Adding high availability with replication.
- Changing the admin password.
- Automatically creating users with relations. 

> - Enabling secure transactions with TLS.

Reviewer: I would probably change this to be a more active tense. So rather than saying "Specifically this tutorial will cover:" I'd say "In this tutorial we will walk through how to:" (or something more along those lines) and then change to e.g. "Set up your environment...", "Deploy MongoDB using..." etc.

Reviewer: (Also, I wasn't sure what "high availability with replication" or "creating users with relations" meant - again, not sure if this is my own lack of familiarity with the product)

Author: Great suggestions here! 

The concept of "high availability with replication" is a MongoDB concept that we will expect the user to understand
The concept of "Creating users" should be a MongoDB concept that the user is familiar with. But relations should be something new to them. Does this make things more clear?

## Minimum requirements

> Before we start be sure you have the following requirements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we start, make sure your machine meets the following requirements:
```

> - Ubuntu 20.04(focal) or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ubuntu 20.04 (Focal) or later.
```

- 8GB of RAM.
- 2 CPU threads.
- At least 20GB of available storage.
- Access to the internet for downloading the required snaps and charms.

## Install and prepare LXD

> The fastest, simplest way to get started with Charmed MongoDB is to set up a local LXD cloud. LXD is a system container and virtual machine manager; Charmed MongoDB will be run in one of these containers and managed by Juju. While this tutorial covers the basics of LXD, you can explore more LXD [here](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/getting-started-cli/). The first step on our journey is to install LXD. LXD is installed from a snap package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fastest, simplest way to get started with Charmed MongoDB is to set up a local LXD cloud. LXD is a system container and virtual machine manager; Charmed MongoDB will be run in one of these containers and managed by Juju. While this tutorial covers the basics of LXD, you can [explore more LXD here](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/getting-started-cli/). The first step on our journey is to install LXD. LXD is installed from a snap package:
```

Reviewer: Longer links are easier for people with screen readers and magnifiers to manage :)

```shell
sudo snap install lxd --classic
```

> Next we need to run `lxd init` to perform post-installation tasks. For this tutorial the default parameters are preferred and the network bridge should be set to have no ipv6 addresses:

Reviewer: I already had lxd installed from a previous tutorial - so it wouldn't let me install classic. 

I'm not sure how to tell if the following two commands completed successfully, other than the fact that there were no errors?

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning why the network bridge should have no IPv6 address? Or can it be assumed that this is something your users would already know?

Author: LXD comes on 20.04 or later, so this part of the tutorial should be updated, let me know what you think of these changes.

"Is it worth mentioning why the network bridge should have no IPv6 address? Or can it be assumed that this is something your users would already know?" -- yes, but I am not sure what exactly to write here, I blatantly copy pasted this from "Expand to see the instructions for LXD" on the [Juju LXD tutorial](https://juju.is/docs/olm/get-started-with-juju):
```
LXD should be already installed in your Ubuntu system. Execute the code below to configure it:

lxd init --auto
lxc network set lxdbr0 ipv6.address none
```
Let me see if I can figure out why we do this

Author: apparently LXD wth ipv6 does not work with Juju - [source](https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/juju-and-ipv6/2210), I will add something to this effect

```shell
lxd init --auto
lxc network set lxdbr0 ipv6.address none 
```

> In the next step we will install Juju. Juju speaks directly to the local LXD daemon, which also requires [lxd group membership](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/getting-started-cli/#access-control). Add `$USER` to the group lxd:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step we will install Juju. Juju speaks directly to the local LXD daemon, which also requires [lxd group membership](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/getting-started-cli/#access-control). Add `$USER` to the group `lxd`:
```

Reviewer: Why are we adding ourselves to the lxd group?

Reviewer: Is there a way to check if this has been done successfully?

Reviewer: also, what is a "group" in this context?

- Set up your environment using LXD and Juju.
- Deploy MongoDB using a single command.
- Access the admin database directly.
- Add high availability with replication.
- Change the admin password.
- Automatically create MongoDB users via Juju relations. 
- Enable secure transactions with TLS.

## Minimum requirements
Before we start, make sure your machine meets the following requirements:
- Ubuntu 20.04 (Focal) or later.
- 8GB of RAM.
- 2 CPU threads.
- At least 20GB of available storage.
- Access to the internet for downloading the required snaps and charms.

> ## Pprepare LXD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prepare LXD
```

# Charmed MongoDB tutorial
The Charmed MongoDB Operator delivers automated operations management from [day 0 to day 2](https://codilime.com/blog/day-0-day-1-day-2-the-software-lifecycle-in-the-cloud-age/) on the [MongoDB Community Edition](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo) document database. It is an open source, end-to-end, production-ready data platform [on top of Juju](https://juju.is/). As a first step this tutorial shows you how to get Charmed MongoDB up and running, but the tutorial does not stop there. Through this tutorial you will learn a variety of operations, everything from adding replicas to advanced operations such as enabling Transcript Layer Security (TLS). In this tutorial we will walk through how to:
- Set up your environment using LXD and Juju.
- Deploy MongoDB using a single command.
- Access the admin database directly.
- Add high availability with replication.
- Change the admin password.
- Automatically create MongoDB users via Juju relations. 
- Enable secure transactions with TLS.

> While this tutorial is aimed to guide and teach you as you deploy Charmed MongoDB. It will be most beneficial if you already have a familairy with: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this tutorial intends to guide and teach you as you deploy Charmed MongoDB, it will be most beneficial if you already have a familiarity with: 
```

```
/snap/bin/lxd
```

Although LXD is already installed, we need to run `lxd init` to perform post-installation tasks. For this tutorial the default parameters are preferred and the network bridge should be set to have no IPv6 addresses, since Juju does not support IPv6 addresses with LXD:
```shell
lxd init --auto
lxc network set lxdbr0 ipv6.address none 
```

You can list all LXD containers by entering the command `lxc list` in to the command line. Although at this point in the tutorial none should exist and you'll only see this as output:
```
+------+-------+------+------+------+-----------+
| NAME | STATE | IPV4 | IPV6 | TYPE | SNAPSHOTS |
+------+-------+------+------+------+-----------+
```

## Install and prepare Juju

> [Juju](https://juju.is/) is an Operator Lifecycle Manager(OLM) for clouds, bare metal, LXD or Kubernetes. We will be using it to deploy and manage Charmed MongoDB. As with LXD, Juju is installed from a snap package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Juju](https://juju.is/) is an Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) for clouds, bare metal, LXD or Kubernetes. We will be using it to deploy and manage Charmed MongoDB. As with LXD, Juju is installed from a snap package:
```

Reviewer: You don't need to link to Juju here, since you already linked to the same URL at the top of the page - any reader who doesn't know what Juju is and wants to read more will have already checked the one at the top :)

> # Charmed MongoDB tutorial:

Reviewer 2: a small style point, but drop the ':' on the headings

- At least 20GB of available storage.
- Access to the internet for downloading the required snaps and charms.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would be nice to include a summary of what this covers, either as a bulletpoint list again, or by adding more to the intro. For example, that it includes setting up LXD and Juju, that it includes how to scale up and down, use TLS etc. It is more than 'getting it up and running'

## Install and prepare Juju
[Juju](https://juju.is/) is an Operator Lifecycle Manager(OLM) for clouds, bare metal, LXD or Kubernetes. We will be using it to deploy and manage Charmed MongoDB. As with LXD, Juju is installed from a snap package:
```shell
sudo snap install juju --classic
```

> Juju already has a built-in knowledge of LXD and how it works, so there is no additional setup or configuration needed. A controller will be used to deploy and control Charmed MongoDB. All we need to do is run the following command to bootstrap a Juju controller named ‘overlord’ to LXD. This bootstrapping processes can take several minutes depending on how provisioned (RAM, CPU,etc) your machine is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Juju already has a built-in knowledge of LXD and how it works, so there is no additional setup or configuration needed. A controller will be used to deploy and control Charmed MongoDB. All we need to do is run the following command to bootstrap a Juju controller named ‘overlord’ to LXD. This bootstrapping processes can take several minutes depending on how provisioned (RAM, CPU, etc.) your machine is:
```

+------+-------+------+------+------+-----------+
```

## Install and prepare Juju

> [Juju](https://juju.is/) is an operation Lifecycle manager(OLM) for clouds, bare metal, LXD or Kubernetes. We will be using it to deploy and manage Charmed MongoDB. As with LXD, Juju is installed from a snap package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Juju](https://juju.is/) is an Operator Lifecycle Manager(OLM) for clouds, bare metal, LXD or Kubernetes. We will be using it to deploy and manage Charmed MongoDB. As with LXD, Juju is installed from a snap package:
```

```shell
sudo snap install juju --classic
```

> Juju already has a built-in knowledge of LXD and how it works, so there is no additional setup or configuration needed. A controller will be used to deploy and control Charmed MongoDB. All we need to do is run the command to bootstrap a Juju controller named ‘overlord’ to LXD. This bootstrapping processes can take several minutes depending on how provisioned your machine is:

Reviewer: What does "provisioned" mean in this context?

Author: in this case we meant RAM, CPU, etc. Does this change make this more clear?

Reviewer: Yes it does, thanks!

> Juju already has a built-in knowledge of LXD and how it works, so there is no additional setup or configuration needed. A controller will be used to deploy and control Charmed MongoDB. All we need to do is run the command to bootstrap a Juju controller named ‘overlord’ to LXD. This bootstrapping processes can take several minutes depending on how provisioned your machine is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Juju already has a built-in knowledge of LXD and how it works, so there is no additional setup or configuration needed. A controller will be used to deploy and control Charmed MongoDB. All we need to do is run the following command to bootstrap a Juju controller named ‘overlord’ to LXD. This bootstrapping processes can take several minutes depending on how provisioned your machine is:
```

Model "admin/tutorial" is empty.
```

> ## Deploying Charmed MongoDB:

Reviewer 2: probably better as 'Deploy Charmed MongoDB'

```

Juju will now fetch Charmed MongoDB and begin deploying it to the LXD cloud. This process can take several minutes depending on how provisioned your machine is. You can track the progress by running:
```
watch -c juju status --color
```

This will show charmed MongoDB along with its current status and other helpful information.

Wait until the application is ready, when it is ready `watch -c juju status --color` will show
```
Every 2.0s: juju status --color                                                                                         ip-172-31-11-104: Fri Dec  2 11:24:30 2022

Model     Controller  Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
tutorial  overlord    localhost/localhost  2.9.37   unsupported  11:24:30Z

App      Version  Status  Scale  Charm    Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
mongodb           active      1  mongodb  dpe/edge   96  no

Unit        Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
mongodb/0*  active    idle   0        10.23.62.156    27017/tcp

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
```

## Accessing MongoDB:

> *Disclaimer: this part of the tutorial accesses MongoDB via the `admin` user. It is not recommended that you directly interface with the admin user in a production environment. In a production environment [create a separate user](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/create-users/) and connect to MongoDB with that user instead. Later in the section covering Relations we will cover how to access MongoDB without the admin user.

Reviewer 2: maybe call this out as a proper admonition

Author: What is the best way to " call this out as a proper admonition"? I changed the wording to be more severe, does that help? Or is there something I should explicitly say.

Reviewer 2: yup, thats what I meant! sorry didn't see your note before

### Connect via MongoDB URI:
Now that we have the necessary fields to connect to the URI, we can connect to MongoDB via the URI. Enter the following into the command line, replace the values for  `username`, `password`, `hosts`, `database name`, and the `replica set name` with what you’ve retrieved above:
```
mongosh mongodb://<username>:<password>@<host>/<database name>?replicaSet=<replica set name>
```

You should now see:
```
Current Mongosh Log ID:	6389e2adec352d5447551ae0
Connecting to:		mongodb://<credentials>@10.23.62.156/admin?replicaSet=mongodb&appName=mongosh+1.6.1
Using MongoDB:		5.0.14
Using Mongosh:		1.6.1

For mongosh info see: https://docs.mongodb.com/mongodb-shell/

To help improve our products, anonymous usage data is collected and sent to MongoDB periodically (https://www.mongodb.com/legal/privacy-policy).
You can opt-out by running the disableTelemetry() command.

------
   The server generated these startup warnings when booting
   2022-12-02T11:24:05.416+00:00: Using the XFS filesystem is strongly recommended with the WiredTiger storage engine. See http://dochub.mongodb.org/core/prodnotes-filesystem
------

------

>    Enable MongoDB's free cloud-based monitoring service, which will then receive and display

Author: This is the output that is generated when you log into MongoDB via `mongosh` so sadly we don't have control over the content that gets outputted there :(

   metrics about your deployment (disk utilization, CPU, operation statistics, etc).

   The monitoring data will be available on a MongoDB website with a unique URL accessible to you
   and anyone you share the URL with. MongoDB may use this information to make product
   improvements and to suggest MongoDB products and deployment options to you.

   To enable free monitoring, run the following command: db.enableFreeMonitoring()
   To permanently disable this reminder, run the following command: db.disableFreeMonitoring()
------

mongodb [primary] admin>
```

> 

Author: Raul and I had conversation earlier where we discussed unnecessary titles and I worked to remove unnecessary titles from the docs.

I think adding titles here is a little unnecessary. (also it would mean that for conistency sake that we also add them when we do other MongoDB commands.) I am going to mark these comments as "Resolved" but if you feel strongly about this please unresolve and we can keep discussing <3

You can now interact with MongoDB directly using any [MongoDB commands](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/command/). For example entering `show dbs` should output something like:
```
admin   172.00 KiB
config  120.00 KiB
local   404.00 KiB

> ```

Author: Raul and I had conversation earlier where we discussed unnecessary titles and I worked to remove unnecessary titles from the docs.

I think adding titles here is a little unnecessary. (also it would mean that for conistency sake that we also add them when we do other MongoDB commands.) I am going to mark these comments as "Resolved" but if you feel strongly about this please unresolve and we can keep discussing <3

Now that we have access to MongoDB we can create a database named `test-db`. To create this database enter:
```
use test-db

> ```

Author: Raul and I had conversation earlier where we discussed unnecessary titles and I worked to remove unnecessary titles from the docs.

I think adding titles here is a little unnecessary. (also it would mean that for conistency sake that we also add them when we do other MongoDB commands.) I am going to mark these comments as "Resolved" but if you feel strongly about this please unresolve and we can keep discussing <3

Now lets create a user called `testUser` read/write access to the database `test-db` that we just created . Enter:
```
db.createUser({
  user: "testUser",
  pwd: "password",
  roles: [
    { role: "readWrite", db: "test-db" }
  ]
})
```
You can verify that you added the user correctly, by entering the command `show users` into the mongo shell, this will output:
```
[
  {
    _id: 'test-db.testUser',
    userId: new UUID("6e841e28-b1bc-4719-bf42-ba4b164fc546"),
    user: 'testUser',
    db: 'test-db',
    roles: [ { role: 'readWrite', db: 'test-db' } ],
    mechanisms: [ 'SCRAM-SHA-1', 'SCRAM-SHA-256' ]
  }
]
```
Feel free to test out any other MongoDB commands, when you’re ready to leave the shell you can just type `exit`.

## Scaling Charmed MongoDB: 
Replication is a popular feature of MongoDB; replicas copy data making a database highly available. 

> 

Author: Great suggestion thank you Michelle!

      health: 1,
      state: 2,
      stateStr: 'SECONDARY',
      uptime: 300,
      optime: { ts: Timestamp({ t: 1669991990, i: 1 }), t: Long("1") },
      optimeDurable: { ts: Timestamp({ t: 1669991990, i: 1 }), t: Long("1") },
      optimeDate: ISODate("2022-12-02T14:39:50.000Z"),
      optimeDurableDate: ISODate("2022-12-02T14:39:50.000Z"),
      lastAppliedWallTime: ISODate("2022-12-02T14:39:50.020Z"),
      lastDurableWallTime: ISODate("2022-12-02T14:39:50.020Z"),
      lastHeartbeat: ISODate("2022-12-02T14:39:51.861Z"),
      lastHeartbeatRecv: ISODate("2022-12-02T14:39:52.372Z"),
      pingMs: Long("0"),
      lastHeartbeatMessage: '',
      syncSourceHost: '10.23.62.55:27017',
      syncSourceId: 1,
      infoMessage: '',
      configVersion: 5,
      configTerm: 1
    }
  ],
  ok: 1,
  '$clusterTime': {
    clusterTime: Timestamp({ t: 1669991990, i: 1 }),
    signature: {
      hash: Binary(Buffer.from("dbe96e73cf659617bb88b6ad11152551c0dd9c8d", "hex"), 0),
      keyId: Long("7172510554420936709")
    }
  },
  operationTime: Timestamp({ t: 1669991990, i: 1 })
}
```

Now exit the shell by typing:
```
exit
```

### Remove replicas:
To remove a replica type:
```

> juju remove-unit mongodb/2

Reviewer 2: It is probably worth expanding on this a bit here. It is obvious to you how the unit numbers work etc, but not to people just blindly pasting things in. Perhaps expand this by demonstrating how you can list the current replicas first, before choosing which unit to remove?

Every 2.0s: juju status --color                                                                                                                                                ip-172-31-11-104: Fri Dec  2 14:44:25 2022

Model     Controller  Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
tutorial  overlord    localhost/localhost  2.9.37   unsupported  14:44:25Z

App      Version  Status  Scale  Charm    Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
mongodb           active      2  mongodb  dpe/edge   96  no       Replica set primary

Unit        Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
mongodb/0*  active    idle   0        10.23.62.156    27017/tcp  Replica set primary
mongodb/1   active    idle   1        10.23.62.55     27017/tcp  Replica set secondary

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
1        started  10.23.62.55   juju-d35d30-1  focal       Running

```

As previously mentioned you can trust that Charmed MongoDB removed this replica correctly. This can be checked by verifying that the new URI (where the removed host has been excluded) works properly.

## Passwords:

> ### Retrieving the admin password:

Reviewer 2: It is generally not a good idea to have headings running on from each other. I would add a little text here explaining that all access to the DB requires a password and the following sections explain how to get and set

    started: 2022-12-02 14:53:28 +0000 UTC
```
The admin password is under the result: `admin-password`. It should be different from your previous password.

*Note when you change the admin password you will also need to update the admin password the in MongoDB URI; as the old password will no longer be valid*

### Setting the admin password
You can change the admin password to a specific password by entering:
```
juju run-action mongodb/leader set-admin-password password=<password> --wait
```
Running the command should output:
```
unit-mongodb-0:
  UnitId: mongodb/0
  id: "4"
  results:
    admin-password: <password>
  status: completed
  timing:
    completed: 2022-12-02 14:53:30 +0000 UTC
    enqueued: 2022-12-02 14:53:25 +0000 UTC
    started: 2022-12-02 14:53:28 +0000 UTC
```
The admin password under the result: `admin-password` should match whatever you passed in when you entered the command.

*Note when you change the admin password you will also need to update the admin password the in MongoDB URI; as the old password will no longer be valid*

## Relations
<!---Juju 3.0 uses integrations; I haven’t been able to find the docs for 2.9 --->

> [Relations](https://juju.is/docs/sdk/integration) are the easiest way to create a user for MongoDB in Charmed MongoDB; relations automatically create a username, password, and database for the desired user/application. As mentioned earlier in the [Accessing MongoDB](#accessing-mongodb) it is a better practice to connect to MongoDB via a specific user rather than the admin user.

Author: Great suggestion thank you Michelle!

tutorial  overlord    localhost/localhost  2.9.37   unsupported  10:32:09Z

App                  Version  Status  Scale  Charm                Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
database-integrator           active      1  database-integrator              0  no       received mongodb credentials
mongodb                       active      2  mongodb              dpe/edge   96  no

Unit                    Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
database-integrator/0*  active    idle   5        10.23.62.216               received mongodb credentials
mongodb/0*              active    idle   0        10.23.62.156    27017/tcp
mongodb/1               active    idle   1        10.23.62.55     27017/tcp  Replica set primary

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
1        started  10.23.62.55   juju-d35d30-1  focal       Running
5        started  10.23.62.216  juju-d35d30-5  jammy       Running
```
To retrieve information such as the username, password, and database. Enter:
```
juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait
```
This should output something like:

> ```

Reviewer 2: you can invoke the syntax highlighting by specifying a type after \```

so for example \```yaml 

```yaml
​​unit-database-integrator-0:
  UnitId: database-integrator/0
  id: "24"
  results:
  ```

```
juju relate tls-certificates-operator mongodb
```

### Connecting to MongoDB with TLS:
Once TLS has been enabled we will need to change how we connect to MongoDB. Specifically we will need to specify the TLS CA file along with the TLS Certificate file. These are hosted on the Charmed MongoDB application. Copy them from Charmed MongoDB to your machine:
```
juju run --unit mongodb/0 -- cat /etc/mongodb/external-ca.crt > external-ca.crt
juju run --unit mongodb/0 -- cat /etc/mongodb/external-cert.pem > external-cert.pem
```

As before, we will connect to MongoDB via a MongoDB URI; use the admin user MongoDB URI that you first used to [connect to MongoDB](#connect-via-mongodb-uri). Connect using the URI and the following TLS options:
```
mongosh mongodb://<username>:<password>@<host1>/<database name>?replicaSet=<replica set name> --tls --tlsCAFile external-ca.crt --tlsCertificateKeyFile external-cert.pem
```

Congratulations, you've now connected to MongoDB with TLS. Now exit the shell by typing `exit`.

### Disabling TLS
To disable TLS unrelate the two applications:
```
juju remove-relation mongodb tls-certificates-operator

> ```

Reviewer 2: It is nice to end a tutorial with a summary, and almost certainly with some "Calls to action", or  a list of places to go next. for example, see [microk8s](https://microk8s.io/docs/getting-started#heading--next-steps)

Author: Yes! Totally agree. This is our only documentation at the moment so we won't be able to link to something that should be done after or places to go next. I can brain storm something though :)

## Deploy Charmed MongoDB
To deploy Charmed MongoDB, all you need to do is run the following command, which will fetch the charm from [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io/mongodb?channel=dpe/edge) and deploy it to your model:
```shell
juju deploy mongodb --channel dpe/edge
```

Juju will now fetch Charmed MongoDB and begin deploying it to the LXD cloud. This process can take several minutes depending on how provisioned (RAM, CPU,etc) your machine is. You can track the progress by running:
```shell
watch -c juju status --color
```

> This command is useful for checking the state of Charmed MongoDB and gathering information about the machines hosting Charmed MongoDB. The command shows the status of Charmed MongoDB along with other helpful information (IP addresses, ports, state, etc). The command updates the status of Charmed MongoDB every couple of second and as the application starts you can watch the status and messages of Charmed MongoDB change. Wait until the application is ready, when it is ready `watch -c juju status --color` will show

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command is useful for checking the status of Charmed MongoDB and gathering information about the machines hosting Charmed MongoDB. Some of the helpful information it displays include IP addresses, ports, state, etc. The command updates the status of Charmed MongoDB every couple of seconds and as the application starts you can watch the status and messages of Charmed MongoDB change. Wait until the application is ready - when it is ready, `watch -c juju status --color` will show:
```

```shell
db.createUser({
  user: "testUser",
  pwd: "password",
  roles: [
    { role: "readWrite", db: "test-db" }
  ]
})
```
You can verify that you added the user correctly by entering the command `show users` into the mongo shell. This will output:
```json
[
  {
    _id: 'test-db.testUser',
    userId: new UUID("6e841e28-b1bc-4719-bf42-ba4b164fc546"),
    user: 'testUser',
    db: 'test-db',
    roles: [ { role: 'readWrite', db: 'test-db' } ],
    mechanisms: [ 'SCRAM-SHA-1', 'SCRAM-SHA-256' ]
  }
]
```
Feel free to test out any other MongoDB commands. When you’re ready to leave the MongoDB shell you can just type `exit`. Once you've typed `exit` you will be back in the host of Charmed MongoDB (`mongodb/0`). Exit this host by entering `exit`. Now you will be in your original shell where you first started the tutorial; where you can interact with Juju and LXD.

## Scale Charmed MongoDB
Replication is a popular feature of MongoDB; replicas copy data making a database highly available. This means the application can provide self-healing capabilities in case one MongoDB replica fails. 

> *Disclaimer: this tutorial hosts replicas all on the same machine, this should not be done in a production environment. to enable high availability in a production environment, replicas should be hosted on different servers to maintain [isolation](https://canonical.com/blog/database-high-availability).*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Disclaimer: this tutorial hosts replicas all on the same machine, this should not be done in a production environment. To enable high availability in a production environment, replicas should be hosted on different servers to [maintain isolation](https://canonical.com/blog/database-high-availability).*
```

```

### Set the admin password
You can change the admin password to a specific password by entering:
```shell
juju run-action mongodb/leader set-password password=<password> --wait
```
Running the command should output:
```yaml
unit-mongodb-0:
  UnitId: mongodb/0
  id: "4"
  results:
    admin-password: <password>
  status: completed
  timing:
    completed: 2022-12-02 14:53:30 +0000 UTC
    enqueued: 2022-12-02 14:53:25 +0000 UTC
    started: 2022-12-02 14:53:28 +0000 UTC
```
The admin password under the result: `admin-password` should match whatever you passed in when you entered the command.

*Note that when you change the admin password you will also need to update the admin password in the MongoDB URI, as the old password will no longer be valid.* To update the DB password used in the URI:
```shell
export DB_PASSWORD=$(juju run-action mongodb/leader get-password --wait | grep admin-password|  awk '{print $2}')
export URI=mongodb://$DB_USERNAME:$DB_PASSWORD@$HOST_IP/$DB_NAME?replicaSet=$REPL_SET_NAME
```

## Relations
<!---Juju 3.0 uses integrations; I haven’t been able to find the docs for 2.9 --->

> [Relations](https://juju.is/docs/sdk/integration), or what juju documentation describes as Integration, are the easiest way to create a user for MongoDB in Charmed MongoDB. Relations automatically create a username, password, and database for the desired user/application. As mentioned earlier in the [Access MongoDB](#access-mongodb) it is a better practice to connect to MongoDB via a specific user rather than the admin user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relations, or what Juju documentation [describes as Integration](https://juju.is/docs/sdk/integration), are the easiest way to create a user for MongoDB in Charmed MongoDB. Relations automatically create a username, password, and database for the desired user/application. As mentioned earlier in the [Access MongoDB section](#access-mongodb) it is a better practice to connect to MongoDB via a specific user rather than the admin user.
```

### Data Integrator Charm

> Before relating to a charmed application, we must deploy our charmed application. In this tutorial we will relate to the [Data Integrator Charm](https://github.com/canonical/data-integrator). This is a bare-bones charm that allows for central management of database users, providing support for different kind of data platforms (e.g. MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Kafka, etc) with a consistent, opinionated and robust user experience. In order to deploy the Data Integrator Charm we must clone its source code from GitHub and create the charm executable ourselves: 

Reviewer: Should "charm" be capitalised? If so, it needs to be capitalised throughout this paragraph.

Author: Hmm, I am not sure. In my opinion I think it should only be capitialised when talked about a specific charm, i.e. the Data Integrator **C**harm, is a *c*harm. My reasoning here is that "Data Integrator **C**harm" is a proper name where as "*c*harm" is an object

> Before relating to a charmed application, we must deploy our charmed application. In this tutorial we will relate to the [Data Integrator Charm](https://github.com/canonical/data-integrator). This is a bare-bones charm that allows for central management of database users, providing support for different kind of data platforms (e.g. MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Kafka, etc) with a consistent, opinionated and robust user experience. In order to deploy the Data Integrator Charm we must clone its source code from GitHub and create the charm executable ourselves: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before relating to a charmed application, we must first deploy our charmed application. In this tutorial we will relate to the [Data Integrator Charm](https://github.com/canonical/data-integrator). This is a bare-bones charm that allows for central management of database users, providing support for different kinds of data platforms (e.g. MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Kafka, etc) with a consistent, opinionated and robust user experience. In order to deploy the Data Integrator Charm we must clone its source code from GitHub and create the charm executable ourselves: 
```

<!--- note in the future replace this with juju deploy instead of from git --->

> ```shell

Reviewer: In the interim, should this be cloned into a separate folder?

Author: I think it is okay to keep it in this folder. In the future when someone does:
```
juju deploy data-integrator
```
it won't create a new folder since it grabs everything from Juju.

Reviewer: Good to know! In that case, yeah it's probably fine to leave it as is, since it's all contained to the cloned folder

git clone https://github.com/canonical/data-integrator.git
cd data-integrator/
sudo snap install charmcraft --classic
charmcraft pack
```

> After packing the charm, you can see that a charm executable named `database-integrator_ubuntu-22.04-amd64.charm` has been created in the `data-integrator` directory. When we deploy the charm we can also specify the name of the database that we want created in MongoDB with the `database` config option. To deploy this charm with juju and create a database in MongoDB named `test-database` enter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After packing the charm, you can see that a charm executable named `database-integrator_ubuntu-22.04-amd64.charm` has been created in the `data-integrator` directory. When we deploy the charm we can also specify the name of the database that we want created in MongoDB with the `database` config option. To deploy this charm with Juju and create a database in MongoDB named `test-database` enter:
```

```shell

> juju deploy ./database-integrator_ubuntu-22.04-amd64.charm --config database=test-database

Reviewer: This didn't work for me - When I looked at the files in this directory, it was called "data-integrator_ubuntu-22.04-amd64.charm" not "database-integrator...". Changing this worked.

Author: yes! Thank you! Inbetween creating this tutorial and now the charm name changed!

```

### Relate to MongoDB
Now that the Database Integrator Charm has been set up, we can relate it to MongoDB. This will automatically create a username, password, and database for the Database Integrator Charm. Relate the two applications with:
```shell

> juju relate database-integrator mongodb

Reviewer: Same problem here, I think it should be "data-integrator"?

Model     Controller  Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
tutorial  overlord    localhost/localhost  2.9.37   unsupported  10:32:09Z

App                  Version  Status  Scale  Charm                Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
database-integrator           active      1  database-integrator              0  no       received mongodb credentials
mongodb                       active      2  mongodb              dpe/edge   96  no

Unit                    Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
database-integrator/0*  active    idle   5        10.23.62.216               received mongodb credentials
mongodb/0*              active    idle   0        10.23.62.156    27017/tcp
mongodb/1               active    idle   1        10.23.62.55     27017/tcp  Replica set primary

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
1        started  10.23.62.55   juju-d35d30-1  focal       Running
5        started  10.23.62.216  juju-d35d30-5  jammy       Running
```
To retrieve information such as the username, password, and database. Enter:
```shell

> juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait

Reviewer: This didn't work for the same reason

      endpoints: 10.23.62.55,10.23.62.156
      password: VMnRws6BlojzDi5e1m2GVWOgJaoSs44d
      replset: mongodb
      uris: mongodb://relation-4:VMnRws6BlojzDi5e1m2GVWOgJaoSs44d@10.23.62.55,10.23.62.156/test-database?replicaSet=mongodb&authSource=admin
      username: relation-4
    ok: "True"
  status: completed
  timing:
    completed: 2022-12-06 10:33:24 +0000 UTC
    enqueued: 2022-12-06 10:33:20 +0000 UTC
    started: 2022-12-06 10:33:24 +0000 UTC
```
Save the value listed under `uris:` *(Note: your hostnames, usernames, and passwords will likely be different.)*

### Access the related database
Notice that in the previous step when you typed `juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait` the command not only outputted the username, password, and database, but also outputted the URI. This means you do not have to generate the URI yourself. To connect to this URI first ssh into `mongodb/0`:
```shell
juju ssh mongodb/0
```
Then access `mongosh` with the URI that you copied above:

```shell
mongosh "<uri copied from juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait>"
```
*Note: be sure you wrap the URI in `"` with no trailing whitespace*

> You will now be in the mongo shell as the user created for this relation. When you relate two applications Charmed MongoDB automatically sets up a user and database for you. Enter `show dbs` into the MongoDB shell, this will output:

Reviewer: This command didn't produce any output for me

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/211786353-7680e5d0-e57e-46ee-a28b-8fc5d02cd9e8.png)

Author: Super mongodb specific reason why this didn't work (and a mistake on my side) I've updated the tutorial appropriately :)

Author: Really such a good catch here Sally! You have eagle eyes

```shell

> test-database  8.00 KiB

Reviewer: This didn't show any output for me

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/211786175-76ccad18-d1d1-4429-94dd-e997ad8314d5.png)

```

> This is the name of the database we specified when we first deployed the `database-integrator` charm. To create a collection in the "test-database" and then show the collection enter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the name of the database we specified when we first deployed the `data-integrator` charm. To create a collection in the "test-database" and then show the collection enter:
```

```shell
db.createCollection("test-collection")
show collections
```
Now insert a document into this database:
```shell
db.test_collection.insertOne(
	{
		First_Name: "Jammy",
		Last_Name: "Jellyfish",
  })
```
You can verify this document was inserted by running:
```shell
db.test_collection.find()
```

Now exit the MongoDB shell by typing:
```shell
exit
```
Now you should be back in the host of Charmed MongoDB (`mongodb/0`). To exit this host type:
```shell
exit
```
You should now be shell you started in where you can interact with Juju and LXD.

### Remove the user
To remove the user, remove the relation. Removing the relation automatically removes the user that was created when the relation was created. Enter the following to remove the relation:
```shell

> juju remove-relation mongodb database-integrator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
juju remove-relation mongodb data-integrator
```

```

Now try again to connect to the same URI you just used in [Access the related database](#access-the-related-database):
```shell
juju ssh mongodb/0
mongosh "<uri copied from juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait>"
```

> *Note: be sure you wrap the URI in `"` with no trailing whitespace*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: be sure you wrap the URI in `"` with no trailing whitespace*.
```

This will output an error message:
```
Current Mongosh Log ID:	638f5ffbdbd9ec94c2e58456
Connecting to:		mongodb://<credentials>@10.23.62.38,10.23.62.219/mongodb?replicaSet=mongodb&authSource=admin&appName=mongosh+1.6.1
MongoServerError: Authentication failed.
```
As this user no longer exists. This is expected as `juju remove-relation mongodb database-integrator` also removes the user. 

Now exit the MongoDB shell by typing:
```shell
exit
```
Now you should be back in the host of Charmed MongoDB (`mongodb/0`). To exit this host type:
```shell
exit
```
You should now be shell you started in where you can interact with Juju and LXD.

If you wanted to recreate this user all you would need to do is relate the the two applications again:
```shell

> juju relate database-integrator mongodb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
juju relate data-integrator mongodb
```

```
Re-relating generates a new password for this user, and therefore a new URI you can see the new URI with:
```shell

> juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait

Reviewer: ```suggestion
juju run-action  data-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait
```

```
Save the result listed with `uris:`.

You can connect to the database with this new URI:
```shell
juju ssh mongodb/0
mongosh "<uri copied from juju run-action  database-integrator/0 get-credentials --wait>"
```

> *Note: be sure you wrap the URI in `"` with no trailing whitespace*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: be sure you wrap the URI in `"` with no trailing whitespace*.
```

From there if you enter `db.test_collection.find()` you will see all of your original documents are still present in the database. 

## Transcript Layer Security (TLS)

> [TLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security) is used to encrypt data exchanged between two applications; it secures data transmitted over the network. Typically enabling up TLS within a highly available database and between a highly available database and client/server applications, requires domain specific knowledge and a high level of expertise. Fortunately, the domain specific knowledge has been encoded into Charmed MongoDB. This means enabling TLS on Charmed MongoDB is readily available and requires minimal effort on your end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security) is used to encrypt data exchanged between two applications; it secures data transmitted over the network. Typically, enabling TLS within a highly available database, and between a highly available database and client/server applications, requires domain-specific knowledge and a high level of expertise. Fortunately, the domain-specific knowledge has been encoded into Charmed MongoDB. This means enabling TLS on Charmed MongoDB is readily available and requires minimal effort on your end.
```

tls-certificates-operator           blocked      1  tls-certificates-operator  edge       16  no       Configuration options missing: ['certificate', 'ca-certificate']

Unit                          Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
mongodb/0*                    active    idle   0        10.23.62.156    27017/tcp  Replica set primary
mongodb/1                     active    idle   1        10.23.62.55     27017/tcp  Replica set secondary
tls-certificates-operator/0*  blocked   idle   3        10.23.62.8                 Configuration options missing: ['certificate', 'ca-certificate']

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
1        started  10.23.62.55   juju-d35d30-1  focal       Running
3        started  10.23.62.8    juju-d35d30-3  focal       Running
```

Now we can configure the TLS certificates. Configure the  `tls-certificates-operator` to use self signed certificates:
```shell
juju config tls-certificates-operator generate-self-signed-certificates="true" ca-common-name="Tutorial CA" 
```

> *Note: this tutorial uses (self signed certificates)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate]; self signed certificates should not be used in a production cluster.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note: this tutorial uses [self-signed certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate); self-signed certificates should not be used in a production cluster.*
```

### Enable TLS
After configuring the certificates `watch -c juju status --color` will show the status of `tls-certificates-operator` as active. To enable TLS on Charmed MongoDB, relate the two applications:
```shell
juju relate tls-certificates-operator mongodb
```

### Connect to MongoDB with TLS
Like before, generate and save the URI that is used to connect to MongoDB:
```
export URI=mongodb://$DB_USERNAME:$DB_PASSWORD@$HOST_IP$DB_NAME?replicaSet=$REPL_SET_NAME
echo $URI
```
Now ssh into `mongodb/0`:
```
juju ssh mongodb/0
```

> After `ssh`ing into `mongodb/0`, we are now in the unit that is hosting Charmed MongoDB. Once TLS has been enabled we will need to change how we connect to MongoDB. Specifically we will need to specify the TLS CA file along with the TLS Certificate file. These are are on the units hosting the Charmed MongoDB application in the folder `/etc/mongodb/`. If you enter: `ls /etc/mongodb/external*` you should see the external certificate file and the external CA file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After `ssh`ing into `mongodb/0`, we are now in the unit that is hosting Charmed MongoDB. Once TLS has been enabled we will need to change how we connect to MongoDB. Specifically we will need to specify the TLS CA file along with the TLS Certificate file. These are on the units hosting the Charmed MongoDB application in the folder `/etc/mongodb/`. If you enter: `ls /etc/mongodb/external*` you should see the external certificate file and the external CA file:
```

```shell
/etc/mongodb/external-ca.crt  /etc/mongodb/external-cert.pem
```

As before, we will connect to MongoDB via the saved MongoDB URI. Connect using the saved URI and the following TLS options:
```shell

> mongosh mongodb://$DB_USERNAME:$DB_PASSWORD@$HOST_IP/$DB_NAME?replicaSet=$REPL_SET_NAME --tls --tlsCAFile /etc/mongodb/external-ca.crt --tlsCertificateKeyFile /etc/mongodb/external-cert.pem

Reviewer: I got blocked here - I'm not sure exactly what happened, except that at one point I was exiting out of mongosh etc and closed my terminal window. I don't know if this caused the problem, but this is what I got when I tried to run this command. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/211789707-d105db54-5a10-4705-a214-fd0af6747f25.png)

Author: Yes! You've found an edge case to the tutorial. So the URI is generated by environment variables. If you exit the terminal where these environment variables are defined then those definitions go away. Which is why when you logged back in and did:
<img width="704" alt="Screenshot 2023-01-11 at 12 49 21" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32723809/211810482-4a4a9926-c570-49eb-909b-bd1d9b18f860.png">
you have an URI without any content.

If you try to use a URI without any content you get this error message:
<img width="581" alt="Screenshot 2023-01-11 at 12 51 04" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32723809/211810823-e29a4526-6cdb-47ff-a164-dd7f407430b3.png">

I can put a disclaimer to this effect when generating the URI if you think that is a good idea :)

Reviewer: It might be worth adding a small note somewhere (maybe by the first occasion where we have to type exit more than once - I exited out of the terminal by accident which could feasibly happen to a user as well).

Author: Yes! I think that is a much better place for this! Thanks for the suggestion!

Author: let me know what you think, changes are on line 268 :)

### Disable TLS
To disable TLS unrelate the two applications:
```shell
juju remove-relation mongodb tls-certificates-operator
```

## Next Steps
In this tutorial we've successfully deployed MongoDB, added/removed replicas, added/removed users to/from the database, and even enabled and disabled TLS. You may now keep your Charmed MongoDB deployment running and write to the database or remove it entirely using the steps in [Remove Charmed MongoDB and Juju](#remove-charmed-mongodb-and-juju). If you're looking for what to do next you can:
- Run [Charmed MongoDB on Kubernetes](https://github.com/canonical/mongodb-k8s-operator).
- Check out our Charmed offerings of [PostGres](https://charmhub.io/postgresql?channel=edge) and [Kafka](https://charmhub.io/kafka?channel=edge).
- Read about [High Availability Best Practices](https://canonical.com/blog/database-high-availability)
- [Report](https://github.com/canonical/mongodb-operator/issues) any problems you encountered.
- [Give us your feedback](https://chat.charmhub.io/charmhub/channels/data-platform).
- [Contribute to the code base](https://github.com/canonical/mongodb-operator)

## Remove Charmed MongoDB and Juju

> If you're done using Charmed MongoDB and Juju and would like to free up resources on your machine you can remove Charmed MongoDB and Juju. *Disclaimer when you remove Charmed MongoDB as shown below you will lose all the data in MongoDB. Further when you remove Juju as shown below you will lose access to any other applications you have hosted on Juju.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're done using Charmed MongoDB and Juju and would like to free up resources on your machine, you can remove Charmed MongoDB and Juju. *Warning: when you remove Charmed MongoDB as shown below you will lose all the data in MongoDB. Further, when you remove Juju as shown below you will lose access to any other applications you have hosted on Juju.*
```

To remove Charmed MongoDB and the model it is hosted on run the command:
```shell
juju destroy-model tutorial --destroy-storage
```

> Next step is to remove the juju controller. You can see all of the available controllers by entering `juju controllers`. To remove the controller enter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next step is to remove the Juju controller. You can see all of the available controllers by entering `juju controllers`. To remove the controller enter:
```

```shell

> juju destroy-controller overlord

Reviewer: It didn't like me running this command: 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/211790467-1d77cc63-7a8b-487a-aed4-ee954d42395c.png)

Author: good to know it seems like the command above that deleted the model didn't succeed. Adding force to the previous command will make this work so I will do just that 😉

Model "admin/tutorial" is empty.
```

## Deploy Charmed MongoDB

> To deploy Charmed MongoDB, fetch the charm from [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io/mongodb?channel=dpe/edge) and deploy it to your model:

Reviewer: I got a bit confused by this, and wasn't sure if I had to go and separately fetch the charm myself because it's linked. It was only after trying running the command that I realised that the command actually does that for me, so I'd reword to something more like the following to make it a bit clearer:

> To deploy Charmed MongoDB, fetch the charm from [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io/mongodb?channel=dpe/edge) and deploy it to your model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy Charmed MongoDB, all you need to do is run the following command, which will fetch the charm from [Charmhub](https://charmhub.io/mongodb?channel=dpe/edge) and deploy it to your model:
```

```shell
juju deploy mongodb --channel dpe/edge
```

Juju will now fetch Charmed MongoDB and begin deploying it to the LXD cloud. This process can take several minutes depending on how provisioned your machine is. You can track the progress by running:
```shell
watch -c juju status --color
```

> This will show charmed MongoDB along with its current status and other helpful information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will show Charmed MongoDB along with its current status and other helpful information.
```

Reviewer: "helpful information" - like what?

> Wait until the application is ready, when it is ready `watch -c juju status --color` will show

Reviewer: I got a bit confused here as well. I went away for a few hours while it was deploying (took a while on my slow internet). When I came back to it, I was pretty sure it was completed, but then I ran the "watch -c juju status --color" command anyway. I got the correct output according to what's here, but I was a bit confused about when and why I should use the command. Would I expect different output if it's not yet completed? Would I have to run it multiple times, or does it continuously update until reaching the output shown below?

(Also how do I get out of that output screen? enter, q, and Esc don't work - I found out by process of elimination that it's ctrl+c)

```
Every 2.0s: juju status --color                                                                                         ip-172-31-11-104: Fri Dec  2 11:24:30 2022

Model     Controller  Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
tutorial  overlord    localhost/localhost  2.9.37   unsupported  11:24:30Z

App      Version  Status  Scale  Charm    Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
mongodb           active      1  mongodb  dpe/edge   96  no

Unit        Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
mongodb/0*  active    idle   0        10.23.62.156    27017/tcp

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
```

## Access MongoDB
*Disclaimer: this part of the tutorial accesses MongoDB via the `admin` user. **Do not** directly interface with the admin user in a production environment. In a production environment [always create a separate user](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/create-users/) and connect to MongoDB with that user instead. Later in the section covering Relations we will cover how to access MongoDB without the admin user.*

> For this part of the Tutorial we will access MongoDB - via the MongoDB shell `mongosh`. You can read more about the MongoDB shell [here](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/).

Reviewer: Why are we using the MongoDB shell?

Author: This is MongoDB specific, the MongoDB shell is how most people access MongoDB. Typically the first thing someone does when they deploy MongoDB (charmed or not charmed) is access MongoDB via the shell. :)

Reviewer: Yes, I think it does. After all, if the *first* thing they do is access it via the shell, that implies there are more things they can also do, so adding this justification about why we're taking these particular steps is helpful (imo).

### Install the MongoDB shell

> While MongoDB is installed within the LXD containers that the application is hosted on, it is not installed on your machine. This means that you will have to install the MongoDB shell yourself. Install `mongosh` by following the official [instructions on how to install the MongoDB shell](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/install/#std-label-mdb-shell-install).

Reviewer: In general, I think it's a good practice to keep a tutorial as self-contained as possible and curate the journey for the learner. If it's possible, try to include the required steps inside this tutorial rather than asking the user to navigate to other pages to follow those steps elsewhere. If the process then becomes very long and arduous and involving many other websites, it can make it more difficult for the user to keep up with the tutorial and they may just abandon it.

Reviewer: While following the instructions in the official `mongosh` install instructions, I got this warning about the command that the tutorial asks you to run:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/208158706-0881397e-d9c1-462e-9e5b-2cebf73d169f.png)

Reviewer: Also, the most recent build there is Focal. I assume that (using Jammy) I should use that one, but it's not 100% clear.

Reviewer: When I ran "sudo apt-get update", this is what I saw:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/208159612-89306146-1d41-4378-803c-50e939e4af5f.png)

Reviewer: The instructions also have this (I'm not sure what this means, or if I need to install one or the other of these - I have assumed neither):

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/208159823-338c5616-8660-4659-97c2-44d20c0f6829.png)

> 

Reviewer: In general, I feel as though these instructions on installing mongosh are out of data and possibly unclear. I'm also not sure if I should only be following this first page, or if I have to use any others. I've come back to your tutorial at the end of the first page (unsure if I've actually correctly installed it or not).

### MongoDB URI

> Connecting to the database requires a [URI](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/connection-string/). We use a URI of the format:

Reviewer: I don't actually know what a URI is, and it's not explained (and the acronym isn't expanded) on the URI page.

Author: Do my additions make things more clear?

Reviewer: Much better! Thank you :)

```
Model     Controller  Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
tutorial  overlord    localhost/localhost  2.9.37   unsupported  11:31:16Z

App      Version  Status  Scale  Charm    Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
mongodb           active      1  mongodb  dpe/edge   96  no       Replica set primary

Unit        Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports      Message
mongodb/0*  active    idle   0        <host IP>    27017/tcp  Replica set primary

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running

```
Use the IP address listed underneath `Public address` for `mongodb/0` as your host.

**Retrieving the database name:** In this case we are connecting to the `admin` database. Use `admin` as the database name. Once we access the database via the MongoDB URI, we will create a `test-db` database to store data.

**Retrieving the replica set name:** The replica set name is the name of the application on Juju hosting MongoDB. The application name in this tutorial is `mongodb`. Use `mongodb` as the replica set name. 

### Connect via MongoDB URI

> Now that we have the necessary fields to connect to the URI, we can connect to MongoDB via the URI. Enter the following into the command line, replace the values for  `username`, `password`, `hosts`, `database name`, and the `replica set name` with what you’ve retrieved above:

Reviewer: I got blocked at this point, and I think I might have either misunderstood the instructions or just done something really obviously wrong. It might be helpful to the user to have an example to cross-reference again to make sure that they have the format correct?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/116022293/208161480-99f68bbf-3f4a-4da8-bd36-0507de191327.png)

For mongosh info see: https://docs.mongodb.com/mongodb-shell/

To help improve our products, anonymous usage data is collected and sent to MongoDB periodically (https://www.mongodb.com/legal/privacy-policy).
You can opt-out by running the disableTelemetry() command.

------
   The server generated these startup warnings when booting
   2022-12-02T11:24:05.416+00:00: Using the XFS filesystem is strongly recommended with the WiredTiger storage engine. See http://dochub.mongodb.org/core/prodnotes-filesystem
------

------
   Enable MongoDB's free cloud-based monitoring service, which will then receive and display
   metrics about your deployment (disk utilization, CPU, operation statistics, etc).

   The monitoring data will be available on a MongoDB website with a unique URL accessible to you
   and anyone you share the URL with. MongoDB may use this information to make product
   improvements and to suggest MongoDB products and deployment options to you.

   To enable free monitoring, run the following command: db.enableFreeMonitoring()
   To permanently disable this reminder, run the following command: db.disableFreeMonitoring()
------

mongodb [primary] admin>
```

> You can now interact with MongoDB directly using any [MongoDB commands](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/command/). For example entering `show dbs` should output something like:

Reviewer: Will you be covering any of those commands later in the tutorial? Or is this left as an "exercise to the reader"?

Author: Some of these commands are shown in the tutorial, but not all of them. (This is a MongoDB specific thing so its less related to the charm itself)

For the sake of learning we walk users though some basic commands, but we assume there is already a familiarity with MongoDB

```
admin   172.00 KiB
config  120.00 KiB
local   404.00 KiB
```
Now that we have access to MongoDB we can create a database named `test-db`. To create this database enter:
```shell
use test-db
```

> Now lets create a user called `testUser` read/write access to the database `test-db` that we just created . Enter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now lets create a user called `testUser` with read/write access to the database `test-db` that we just created. Enter:
```

```shell
db.createUser({
  user: "testUser",
  pwd: "password",
  roles: [
    { role: "readWrite", db: "test-db" }
  ]
})
```

> You can verify that you added the user correctly, by entering the command `show users` into the mongo shell, this will output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify that you added the user correctly by entering the command `show users` into the mongo shell. This will output:
```

```json
[
  {
    _id: 'test-db.testUser',
    userId: new UUID("6e841e28-b1bc-4719-bf42-ba4b164fc546"),
    user: 'testUser',
    db: 'test-db',
    roles: [ { role: 'readWrite', db: 'test-db' } ],
    mechanisms: [ 'SCRAM-SHA-1', 'SCRAM-SHA-256' ]
  }
]
```

> Feel free to test out any other MongoDB commands, when you’re ready to leave the MongoDB shell you can just type `exit`. Once you've entered `exit`, you should be back in the shell you started in where you can interact with Juju and LXD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to test out any other MongoDB commands. When you’re ready to leave the MongoDB shell you can just type `exit`. Once you've typed `exit` you will be back in the original shell, where you can interact with Juju and LXD.
```

Reviewer: I suggest these changes for clarity - saying "entered 'exit'" is a slightly odd phrasing.

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Series  AZ  Message
0        started  10.23.62.156  juju-d35d30-0  focal       Running
```
To exit the screen with `watch -c juju status --color`, enter `ctrl+c`.

## Access MongoDB
*Disclaimer: this part of the tutorial accesses MongoDB via the `admin` user. **Do not** directly interface with the admin user in a production environment. In a production environment [always create a separate user](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/create-users/) and connect to MongoDB with that user instead. Later in the section covering Relations we will cover how to access MongoDB without the admin user.*

> The first action most users take after installing MongoDB is accessing MongoDB. The easiest way to do this is via the MongoDB shell, with `mongosh`. You can read more about the MongoDB shell [here](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/). For this part of the Tutorial we will access MongoDB via  `mongosh`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first action most users take after installing MongoDB is accessing MongoDB. The easiest way to do this is via the MongoDB shell, with `mongosh`. You can read more about the MongoDB shell [here](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/). For this part of the Tutorial we will access MongoDB via  `mongosh`.
```

```
The admin password under the result: `admin-password` should match whatever you passed in when you entered the command.

> *Note when you change the admin password you will also need to update the admin password the in MongoDB URI; as the old password will no longer be valid.* Update the DB password used in the URI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note that when you change the admin password you will also need to update the admin password in the MongoDB URI, as the old password will no longer be valid.* To update the DB password used in the URI:
```
